Project Title: Development  of Laboratory management web portal  
Problem Statement:   
ICAR -IIRR is a premiere rice research Institute funded by Govt. of India.  It houses state of 
the art research laboratories each focusing on a specific research program. Each laboratory is 
headed by a Principal Investigator/Lab Administrator. The Lab admin manages all resources 
including people, project, publications, and invento ry of the laboratory for smooth execution 
of research experiments to achieve the objectives. Therefore, a complete suite (web portal) with   
a dashboard for real time monitoring of status of all resources is essential for the Lab Admin 
for the efficient deployment resources to increase the productivity  of the lab.  
Pain Points:  Currently, the information about all these resources  is scatte red in different hard 
copies of files, soft copies of documents stored in different folders/computers making it tedious 
and time consuming for the lab Admin  to manage them and for checking the status in real time.  
Solution:  Development of a complete suite (web portal) with a dashboard for real time 
monitoring of status of all resources   
Approach:  Designing a Laboratory management web portal  with an integrated dashboard 
requires a centralized approach to track, and deploy laboratory sources like people, projects, 
and inventory etc. The system should provide high -value, actionable insights to reduce 
duplication of tasks,  planning  timely purchase of inventory, recruitment of people, etc.  It 
should ideally have following features : 
1. The Dashboard  (Command Center):  The dashboard should provide a high -level 
overview and real -time status of laboratory resources . 
 
2. A Centralized Repository  of all resources : 
 People : It includ es all categories like Lab Admin, Scientist, Technician, Post Doc, 
RA, SRF, JRF, Project Assistant, PhD student, MSc Student  along with date of 
joining and data of relieving,  etc. 
 Projects:  Project Name, Project Code, Type of Project, Funding Source, Date of 
Start, Date of Closing, Report Status.  
 Publications:  Publication title, Project, Year, Journal, NAAS Score  
 Inventory: Permanent Equipment, Semi -Permanent, Chemicals, Glassware, Plastic 
ware, Miscellaneous items with following details for each item:  Date of purchase , 
Make, Model, Cat No, Qty, Price, Total Quantity in Stock.  
 
3. Analytics & Reporting:  Ability to generate Custom Reports  by Resource classes  
 
4. Technical Requirements & User Experience  
 Security & Compliance:  High -security encryption  and Access control  (e.g., 
HTTPS, 2FA) to protect sensitive IP data.  
 Integration:  Integration with Microsoft Office (Word/ Excel/ Outlook) for filing and 
document creation.  
5. Implementation Steps  
 On boarding :  
---
  Creation of database files, data entry offline/online through portal’s user 
interface with role based login credentials .  
 
  Inventorying all lab resources , and en tering in to digital databases  
 
 System Configuration:   
 
 Setting up customized dashboards, workflows, and automated reminders.  
 
This structure  should ensure  that the Lab management platform is not just a repository, but a 
strategic tool to protect and maximize the value of IP assets.  
Data Base Structure : 
 
Database -1: People  
Fields: Lab Admin, Scientist, Technician, Post Doc, RA, SRF, JRF, Project 
Assistant, PhD student, MSc Student  along with date of joining and data of 
relieving,  
 
  Database -2 – Projects  
Fields: Project Name, Project Code, Type of Project, Funding Source, Date of S tart, 
Date of Closing, Report Status.  
 
Data Base -3 – Publications  
Fields: Project, Year, Journal, NAAS Score  
 
Data Base -4 – Inventory   
Fields: Inventory Class (drop down: Permanent Equipment, Semi -Permanent, 
Chemicals, Glassware, Plastic ware, Miscellaneous items ), Date of purchase , 
Make, Model, Cat No, Qty, Price, Total Quantity in Stock.  
 
 
 
 
---
